Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
maternal and fetal physiology. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss maternal physiology. Outline the major physiological changes of
pregnancy and why they matter to anaesthesia.
Pregnancy produces profound changes in almost every system of the mother's body,
of great importance to anaesthesia,
and an overview of these and their relevance is the foundation of obstetric
anaesthesia, so it is worth setting out.
Pregnancy is accompanied by widespread physiological adaptations,
driven by the hormones of pregnancy and the demands of the growing fetus and
uterus, affecting most systems.
They matter to anaesthesia because they alter the mother's responses to anaesthesia
and her risks, and because the anaesthetist frequently cares for the pregnant
patient, for delivery and for surgery.
The principal changes, system by system, are: in the cardiovascular system,
an increase in the blood volume, cardiac output and heart rate,
and a fall in the vascular resistance and blood pressure, with, importantly,
the compression of the great vessels by the gravid uterus in the supine position;
in the respiratory system, an increased ventilation and oxygen consumption,
with a reduced lung reserve; in the blood,
an increase in volume with a relative anaemia, and an increased tendency to clot;
in the gastrointestinal system, an increased risk of regurgitation and aspiration;
and changes in the handling of and sensitivity to anaesthetic drugs.
These changes are most marked in late pregnancy.
I shall describe the major systems in turn,
but the overarching point is that the pregnant patient is physiologically altered
in ways that affect every aspect of her anaesthetic care,
and that two patients — mother and fetus — must be considered.
So pregnancy produces widespread adaptations — cardiovascular,
with increased volume and output, reduced resistance, and aortocaval compression;
respiratory, with increased ventilation and reduced reserve; haematological,
with increased volume, relative anaemia and a prothrombotic tendency;
gastrointestinal, with increased aspiration risk;
and altered drug handling — driven by the hormones and demands of pregnancy,
of great anaesthetic importance, with mother and fetus both to be considered — the
foundation of obstetric anaesthesia.
Describe the cardiovascular changes of pregnancy, including aortocaval compression.
The cardiovascular changes of pregnancy are among the most important,
both for the demands they place on the mother and for the phenomenon of aortocaval
compression, which is of direct anaesthetic relevance, so they are worth describing.
Pregnancy places a substantial extra demand on the cardiovascular system,
met by several changes. The blood volume increases substantially,
by a third or more.
The cardiac output increases markedly, by a similar amount,
through increases in both the heart rate and the stroke volume,
to supply the uterus and the increased metabolism.
The systemic vascular resistance falls,
owing to the vasodilating effect of the pregnancy hormones and the low-resistance
placental circulation, so that, despite the increased output,
the blood pressure tends to fall somewhat in mid-pregnancy before recovering.
A crucial phenomenon is aortocaval compression.
In late pregnancy, when the mother lies supine,
the heavy gravid uterus compresses the great vessels against the spine — the
inferior vena cava, reducing the venous return to the heart, and the aorta.
The reduced venous return reduces the cardiac output,
and can cause a fall in blood pressure — supine hypotension — and reduce the blood
flow to the uterus and so to the fetus.
This is of direct anaesthetic importance,
because it is worsened by the vasodilatation of anaesthesia,
particularly regional anaesthesia; it is prevented by avoiding the supine position
— tilting the mother to the left, or displacing the uterus,
to relieve the compression.
So in pregnancy the blood volume and cardiac output increase markedly while the
vascular resistance falls; and, crucially,
in late pregnancy the supine gravid uterus compresses the inferior vena cava and
aorta — aortocaval compression — reducing venous return,
cardiac output and uterine blood flow, causing supine hypotension,
worsened by anaesthesia and prevented by left tilt or uterine displacement —
cardiovascular changes of direct anaesthetic importance.
Describe the respiratory changes of pregnancy and their anaesthetic implications.
The respiratory changes of pregnancy have important anaesthetic implications,
particularly for the management of the airway and the tendency to rapid hypoxia,
so they are worth describing. Pregnancy alters the respiratory system in several
ways.
The oxygen consumption is increased, by the metabolism of the mother and fetus.
The ventilation is increased — the mother breathes more,
chiefly by breathing more deeply — increased beyond the rise in oxygen consumption,
so that the carbon dioxide level falls somewhat,
a compensated respiratory alkalosis of pregnancy.
Mechanically, the enlarging uterus pushes up the diaphragm,
which reduces the lung volume at the end of a normal breath — the functional
residual capacity, the reserve of air in the lungs — is reduced.
The combination of these changes has important anaesthetic implications.
The reduced reserve of air in the lungs,
together with the increased oxygen consumption,
means that the pregnant patient has a much-reduced store of oxygen and a higher
rate of using it, so that, if ventilation stops — as during the induction of
anaesthesia and intubation — she becomes hypoxic much more rapidly than the
non-pregnant patient; this makes thorough pre-oxygenation essential and the period
of apnoea during intubation more dangerous.
The airway itself is more difficult — more swollen and vascular,
and with the increased aspiration risk — making airway management more hazardous.
So the respiratory changes of pregnancy — increased oxygen consumption and
ventilation, with a reduced lung reserve from the raised diaphragm — have the
important anaesthetic implications that the patient desaturates rapidly during
apnoea, making pre-oxygenation essential and intubation more pressing and
dangerous, compounded by a more difficult,
swollen airway and the aspiration risk — changes of direct anaesthetic importance
to airway management.
Describe the changes in pregnancy relevant to aspiration risk and to the handling
of anaesthetic drugs.
Pregnancy increases the risk of aspiration and alters the handling of and
sensitivity to anaesthetic drugs, both of which are of direct anaesthetic
importance, so they are worth describing together.
The aspiration risk is increased in pregnancy for several reasons,
making the regurgitation and aspiration of gastric contents a particular hazard in
the obstetric patient.
The gravid uterus displaces the stomach and raises the intra-abdominal pressure;
the barrier at the inlet of the stomach — the lower oesophageal sphincter — is
rendered less competent by the pregnancy hormones and the mechanical changes;
and gastric emptying may be delayed,
particularly in labour and with the opioids given for pain.
So the pregnant patient, especially in labour,
is treated as having a full stomach and being at high risk of aspiration — hence
the precautions of antacid prophylaxis and a rapid sequence induction with cricoid
pressure when general anaesthesia is required.
The handling of and response to anaesthetic drugs is also altered.
The pregnant patient is more sensitive to anaesthetic agents — requiring less of
the volatile agents and of local anaesthetic for regional blocks,
partly through the effects of the hormones and the physiological changes;
the increased blood volume and altered protein and body composition affect drug
distribution; and account must be taken of the transfer of drugs across the
placenta to the fetus.
So the increased aspiration risk and the altered drug handling both shape the
conduct of anaesthesia.
So pregnancy increases the aspiration risk — through the displaced stomach,
the less competent lower oesophageal sphincter, and delayed gastric emptying,
especially in labour — so the patient is treated as having a full stomach,
with antacid prophylaxis and rapid sequence induction;
and it alters drug handling — an increased sensitivity requiring less volatile and
local anaesthetic, altered distribution,
and the transfer of drugs to the fetus across the placenta — changes of direct
importance to the conduct of anaesthesia.
Describe the placenta and the principles of placental transfer of substances.
The placenta is the organ of exchange between the mother and the fetus,
and an understanding of it and of the principles governing the transfer of
substances, including drugs, across it, is important to anaesthesia,
so it is worth describing.
The placenta is the organ through which the fetus is supplied and its wastes
removed: the maternal and fetal circulations are brought into close apposition
within it, separated by a thin barrier,
allowing exchange between them without the bloods mixing.
Across this barrier, the fetus obtains oxygen and nutrients from the mother and
gives up carbon dioxide and waste.
The transfer of substances across the placenta occurs by the same mechanisms as
across other membranes: chiefly simple diffusion, down concentration gradients,
for substances such as the respiratory gases;
and facilitated and active transport for nutrients such as glucose and amino acids.
The principles governing the diffusion of a substance — including drugs — across
the placenta are the same as for any lipid membrane: lipid-soluble, un-ionised,
small, and unbound molecules cross readily, while water-soluble, ionised, large,
and protein-bound molecules cross poorly.
This is of direct anaesthetic importance,
because most anaesthetic drugs are lipid-soluble and cross the placenta readily —
so that drugs given to the mother reach the fetus, affecting the newborn,
a key consideration; whereas some drugs,
such as the highly-ionised muscle relaxants, cross poorly.
So the choice and timing of drugs given to the mother must consider their transfer
to the fetus.
So the placenta is the organ of exchange,
bringing the maternal and fetal circulations close across a thin barrier for the
transfer of oxygen, nutrients and wastes;
substances crossing by diffusion and by carrier transport,
the diffusion of drugs following the usual rules — lipid-soluble, un-ionised,
small, unbound molecules crossing readily; of direct anaesthetic importance,
as most anaesthetic drugs cross readily to the fetus,
while the ionised relaxants cross poorly — governing the choice and timing of
maternal drugs.
Describe the key features of fetal and neonatal transitional circulation.
The circulation of the fetus is fundamentally different from that after birth,
and the transition at birth from the fetal to the newborn pattern is a remarkable
and important event, so an outline of the fetal circulation and its transition is
worth giving.
Before birth, the fetus does not breathe air;
it obtains its oxygen from the mother through the placenta,
and its lungs are collapsed and not used for gas exchange.
The fetal circulation is therefore arranged differently,
to direct the blood to and from the placenta and to bypass the non-functioning
lungs.
The well-oxygenated blood returns from the placenta and is directed,
through special channels — the shunts of the fetal circulation — so as to bypass
the lungs and supply the vital organs;
these shunts include a channel allowing blood to bypass the lungs within the heart,
and another bypassing them in the great vessels,
and the connection to and from the placenta.
At birth, a dramatic transition occurs. The baby takes its first breaths,
the lungs expand and fill with air,
and the resistance of the pulmonary circulation falls sharply,
so that blood now flows through the lungs to be oxygenated.
The placenta is lost from the circulation.
These changes alter the pressures and flows so that the fetal shunts close —
functionally at first, then permanently — converting the circulation to the adult
pattern, with the blood now passing through the lungs.
This transition can be disturbed — by hypoxia and other problems — with a reversion
towards the fetal pattern, a concern in the sick newborn.
So the fetal circulation is arranged to use the placenta for gas exchange and to
bypass the non-functioning lungs through special shunts; at birth,
the first breaths expand the lungs and the pulmonary resistance falls,
blood flows through the lungs, the placenta is lost, and the fetal shunts close,
converting to the adult circulation — a transition that can be disturbed by
hypoxia, reverting towards the fetal pattern — a remarkable and important event.
Pull it together: how do the physiological changes of pregnancy shape anaesthetic
care?
I would draw maternal and fetal physiology together around the principle that
pregnancy alters almost every system in ways that shape every aspect of anaesthetic
care, and that the anaesthetist must consider both mother and fetus.
The changes, driven by the hormones and demands of pregnancy, are widespread.
The cardiovascular changes — the increased volume and output and reduced
resistance, and above all aortocaval compression — require the avoidance of the
supine position, with left tilt, to maintain the circulation and the uterine blood
flow.
The respiratory changes — the increased oxygen consumption and reduced lung reserve
— mean rapid desaturation during apnoea,
requiring thorough pre-oxygenation and making intubation more pressing,
compounded by a difficult airway.
The gastrointestinal changes increase the aspiration risk,
so the patient is treated as having a full stomach,
with antacid prophylaxis and rapid sequence induction.
The altered drug handling means increased sensitivity, with reduced doses,
and the transfer of drugs across the placenta to the fetus must be considered.
And the fetus, supplied through the placenta,
depends on the maintenance of the maternal circulation and is affected by maternal
drugs and by any compromise. So the care of the pregnant patient is shaped
throughout by her altered physiology, with two patients in mind.
So the physiological changes of pregnancy shape anaesthetic care comprehensively:
the cardiovascular changes and aortocaval compression requiring left tilt;
the respiratory changes requiring pre-oxygenation against rapid desaturation;
the increased aspiration risk requiring full-stomach precautions;
the altered drug handling requiring reduced doses and consideration of placental
transfer; and the fetus, supplied through the placenta,
depending on the maternal circulation — the anaesthetist considering both mother
and fetus throughout — the foundation of obstetric anaesthetic care.
Describe the respiratory changes of pregnancy and their anaesthetic implications.
Pregnancy alters respiration from early on, driven largely by progesterone.
Minute ventilation rises by about fifty per cent,
almost all through an increase in tidal volume rather than rate,
producing a chronic, compensated respiratory alkalosis with an arterial carbon
dioxide tension around four kilopascals and a base excess fall maintaining
near-normal pH; this gradient aids fetal carbon dioxide offloading.
Oxygen consumption rises by around twenty per cent at term because of the metabolic
demands of the fetus, uterus and increased maternal work.
At the same time the enlarging uterus splints the diaphragm and reduces functional
residual capacity by about twenty per cent, and supine position worsens this.
The combination of raised oxygen consumption and reduced oxygen store in a smaller
functional residual capacity is dangerous:
the apnoeic pregnant patient desaturates far faster than the non-pregnant.
The practical implications are therefore thorough preoxygenation before any general
anaesthetic, anticipation of rapid desaturation,
attention to positioning to preserve functional residual capacity,
and awareness that capnography targets must be interpreted against the lower
baseline carbon dioxide.
So pregnancy is a state of increased ventilation and consumption with reduced
reserve, and the headline anaesthetic message is the narrow safe apnoea time.
Now the cardiovascular changes.
The cardiovascular system undergoes profound adaptation.
Cardiac output rises by about forty per cent by the end of the second trimester,
achieved by increases in both stroke volume and heart rate,
and rises further in labour and dramatically in the minutes after delivery.
Plasma volume expands by around fifty per cent while red cell mass rises by only
twenty to thirty per cent, producing the dilutional physiological anaemia of
pregnancy that nonetheless aids placental flow by reducing viscosity.
Systemic vascular resistance falls under the influence of progesterone,
prostacyclin and nitric oxide, and of the low-resistance placental circulation,
so that despite the higher output arterial pressure falls slightly in mid-pregnancy
before recovering.
The heart is displaced and there are benign flow murmurs and ECG changes.
After delivery, the relief of caval compression and the autotransfusion of
uteroplacental blood cause a sharp rise in preload and cardiac output,
which is the moment of greatest cardiac risk in women with heart disease.
The implications are a circulation already near its reserve,
poorly tolerant of further vasodilatation from neuraxial block or of haemorrhage,
and a postpartum surge that must be anticipated.
So pregnancy is a high-output, low-resistance,
volume-expanded state with a critical haemodynamic transition at delivery.
Explain aortocaval compression and how you prevent it.
Aortocaval compression, or the supine hypotensive syndrome,
results from the gravid uterus compressing the inferior vena cava and,
to a lesser degree, the aorta when the woman lies supine,
typically from about twenty weeks.
Caval compression reduces venous return and so cardiac output;
in most women a compensatory tachycardia and vasoconstriction and collateral azygos
flow maintain pressure, but in perhaps ten per cent these fail and overt
hypotension, pallor, nausea and faintness occur.
Even when maternal pressure is maintained,
aortic and uteroplacental compression can reduce placental perfusion and threaten
the fetus silently.
The danger is greatly magnified under neuraxial or general anaesthesia,
which removes the compensatory sympathetic vasoconstriction,
so profound hypotension can follow a spinal in a supine parturient.
Prevention is simple and mandatory:
avoid the full supine position from the second trimester onwards by tilting the
patient at least fifteen degrees to the left,
or by manual displacement of the uterus to the left,
which lifts it off the great vessels.
Adequate preloading or co-loading with fluid and prompt vasopressors,
with phenylephrine now preferred, support pressure under neuraxial block.
So from twenty weeks the uterus must never be allowed to rest on the great vessels,
and left lateral tilt is the cornerstone of prevention.
What airway changes occur in pregnancy and why do they concern us?
The pregnant airway is more difficult and less forgiving,
and difficult or failed intubation is historically a leading cause of anaesthetic
maternal death.
Capillary engorgement and oedema of the mucosa of the nose, oropharynx and larynx,
driven by oestrogen and the increased blood volume, narrow the airway,
make tissues friable and prone to bleeding,
and worsen with the fluid shifts of pre-eclampsia and the straining of labour.
Mallampati scores rise through pregnancy and during labour itself.
Weight gain and breast enlargement impede laryngoscopy.
Combined with the rapid desaturation from reduced functional residual capacity and
raised oxygen consumption, and the increased aspiration risk,
this makes the pregnant general anaesthetic high-risk.
The practical responses are to favour regional anaesthesia wherever possible,
avoiding the airway altogether; to assess the airway carefully and prepare for
difficulty; to use a smaller tracheal tube, around size seven,
anticipating the narrowed, oedematous glottis;
to avoid nasal instrumentation because of bleeding;
to have a clear failed-intubation drill and videolaryngoscopy and supraglottic
rescue devices ready; and to ensure skilled assistance.
So pregnancy makes the airway swollen, narrow, bloody and quick to desaturate,
which is precisely why neuraxial techniques dominate obstetric practice.
Detail the gastrointestinal changes and the basis of aspiration risk.
Several changes combine to make the pregnant patient at increased risk of
regurgitation and aspiration of gastric contents,
the basis of the long-standing rule to treat the parturient as having a full
stomach from the second trimester.
Progesterone relaxes smooth muscle, reducing lower oesophageal sphincter tone,
while the enlarging uterus displaces the stomach upward and raises intragastric
pressure, together favouring reflux; heartburn is common clinically.
Gastric emptying itself is not greatly delayed in pregnancy until labour begins,
but in labour, and with opioid analgesia,
emptying slows markedly and gastric volume rises.
Gastric acid secretion is increased.
The consequence is a real risk of aspiration of acidic stomach contents during
induction or emergence, historically Mendelson's syndrome.
The protective measures are therefore aspiration prophylaxis — typically
ranitidine, or an alternative acid-suppressant,
and sodium citrate to neutralise residual acid before a general anaesthetic;
a rapid sequence induction with cricoid pressure to protect the airway during
induction; and, again, the strong preference for regional techniques that keep the
airway protected by the patient's own reflexes.
So loss of sphincter tone, mechanical displacement and labour-related delayed
emptying create genuine aspiration risk,
and rapid sequence induction with prophylaxis is the response when general
anaesthesia is unavoidable.
What haematological changes occur, and what is their significance?
Pregnancy is a prothrombotic, volume-expanded state.
As noted, plasma volume rises proportionally more than red cell mass,
giving a dilutional anaemia with a haemoglobin around eleven grams;
iron and folate demands rise.
The haemostatic system shifts markedly towards coagulation:
levels of fibrinogen and of factors seven, eight, nine, ten and twelve rise,
von Willebrand factor rises, and the natural anticoagulant protein S falls,
while fibrinolysis is reduced.
This hypercoagulability is teleologically protective against the haemorrhage of
delivery, but it makes venous thromboembolism several-fold more likely,
and pulmonary embolism remains a leading cause of maternal death;
thromboprophylaxis and early mobilisation are accordingly emphasised.
There is a mild physiological fall in the platelet count,
gestational thrombocytopenia, which must be distinguished from the pathological
thrombocytopenia of pre-eclampsia and HELLP syndrome,
relevant because a low platelet count may contraindicate neuraxial block.
The white cell count rises. The expanded volume means a parturient can lose a large
amount of blood before showing the usual signs,
masking haemorrhage until it is advanced.
So the haematological message is dilutional anaemia,
a strong prothrombotic tendency demanding thromboprophylaxis,
and a volume reserve that conceals bleeding.
Describe the mechanisms of placental transfer of drugs and the factors that govern
it.
The placenta is not a barrier but an exchange organ,
and most drugs given to the mother reach the fetus to some degree.
Transfer occurs chiefly by passive diffusion, governed by the Fick principle,
so the rate depends on the concentration gradient, the surface area,
the membrane thickness, and the properties of the molecule.
Small, lipid-soluble, un-ionised, poorly protein-bound molecules cross readily —
most anaesthetic drugs, including induction agents, volatile agents,
opioids and benzodiazepines, fall into this category and reach the fetus quickly.
Large, polar, ionised or highly protein-bound molecules cross poorly;
the muscle relaxants, being large, quaternary and ionised, scarcely cross,
which is why maternal paralysis does not paralyse the fetus, and heparin,
being large, does not cross whereas warfarin does.
Ion trapping is important: a drug that is more ionised at the slightly more acidic
fetal pH, such as a local anaesthetic, can accumulate on the fetal side,
and this worsens if the fetus is acidotic.
Active transport and metabolism by the placenta modify transfer for some
substances. The practical lesson is to anticipate fetal exposure to lipophilic
drugs — neonatal depression after maternal opioids or general anaesthesia — and to
time and choose drugs accordingly.
So placental transfer is mainly Fick-governed diffusion favouring small lipophilic
molecules, with ion trapping a special hazard for local anaesthetics in the
acidotic fetus.
How is the pharmacology of anaesthetic drugs altered in pregnancy?
Pregnancy changes both pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics,
generally reducing dose requirements.
The minimum alveolar concentration of volatile agents falls by about thirty per
cent, attributed to progesterone and rising endorphins,
so less volatile agent is needed and awareness must still be guarded against at
lighter settings.
The dose of local anaesthetic required for neuraxial block falls by around a third:
the epidural veins are engorged, reducing the volume of the epidural and
subarachnoid spaces so that a given dose spreads further,
and progesterone may increase neural sensitivity.
Induction agents act faster owing to the hyperdynamic circulation.
Kinetically, the increased volume of distribution from expanded plasma and total
body water can lower peak concentrations of water-soluble drugs,
while reduced plasma protein concentration raises the free fraction of bound drugs.
Plasma cholinesterase activity falls by about a quarter,
but the increased volume of distribution offsets this so suxamethonium duration is
not clinically prolonged.
Renal clearance increases with the raised glomerular filtration rate,
hastening elimination of renally cleared drugs.
The overarching practical points are to reduce volatile and neuraxial local
anaesthetic doses, to remain alert to awareness, and to remember rapid onset.
So pregnancy makes patients more sensitive to volatile and neuraxial agents while
expanding the volume into which water-soluble drugs distribute.
What determines uteroplacental blood flow, and how do you protect it?
Uteroplacental blood flow at term is large,
around seven hundred millilitres per minute, some ten per cent of cardiac output,
and it is essential for fetal oxygen and substrate delivery.
Crucially, the uteroplacental circulation is, in normal pregnancy,
a maximally dilated, low-resistance bed that does not autoregulate,
so flow is directly proportional to maternal perfusion pressure and inversely
proportional to uterine vascular resistance — flow equals the pressure across the
bed divided by its resistance.
This has direct consequences. Maternal hypotension, from aortocaval compression,
haemorrhage or sympathetic block, reduces flow directly and threatens the fetus.
Increased uterine vascular resistance,
from endogenous or exogenous catecholamines causing uterine arterial
vasoconstriction, or from uterine hypertonus, also reduces flow.
Protecting flow therefore means maintaining maternal blood pressure and avoiding
caval compression — hence left tilt,
fluid loading and prompt treatment of hypotension.
The historic concern that alpha-agonist vasopressors might constrict the uterine
vessels has been largely allayed: phenylephrine maintains maternal pressure with
good fetal outcomes and is now the agent of choice, with ephedrine,
which crosses the placenta and can cause fetal acidosis, less favoured.
So uteroplacental flow is pressure-dependent and non-autoregulating,
and we protect the fetus by protecting maternal pressure and uterine relaxation.
Describe the fetal circulation and the changes that occur at birth.
The fetal circulation is adapted to an organism whose oxygenation occurs at the
placenta, not the lungs, and it uses three shunts to direct the best-oxygenated
blood to the brain and heart while bypassing the non-functioning lungs.
Oxygenated blood returns from the placenta in the umbilical vein;
much of it bypasses the liver through the ductus venosus to the inferior vena cava.
In the right atrium, this stream is preferentially directed across the foramen
ovale to the left atrium, left ventricle and aorta,
supplying the coronary and cerebral circulations with the highest available oxygen.
Blood returning from the upper body to the right ventricle is pumped into the
pulmonary artery but, because pulmonary vascular resistance is high in the
fluid-filled fetal lung, most crosses the ductus arteriosus into the descending
aorta and returns to the placenta.
At birth, two events transform this:
the first breaths expand the lungs and oxygen relaxes the pulmonary vessels,
so pulmonary vascular resistance falls sharply and pulmonary blood flow rises;
and clamping the cord removes the low-resistance placenta,
raising systemic resistance.
The rise in left atrial pressure closes the foramen ovale,
and rising oxygen and falling prostaglandins close the ductus arteriosus over hours
to days.
So the fetus uses ductus venosus, foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus to bypass
liver and lungs, and the first breaths reverse the pressure gradients that held
these shunts open.
Tell me about fetal haemoglobin and fetal oxygenation.
The fetus must extract oxygen from maternal blood across the placenta and does so
in a relatively hypoxic environment — umbilical venous oxygen tension is only
around four kilopascals — yet it thrives, through several adaptations.
Fetal haemoglobin, with two alpha and two gamma chains,
binds two-three-DPG less avidly than adult haemoglobin,
so its oxygen dissociation curve is shifted to the left,
giving it a higher affinity for oxygen;
this allows it to load oxygen at the low tensions prevailing in the placenta.
The maternal curve, by contrast, is shifted slightly to the right in pregnancy,
favouring offloading.
This difference in affinity, the double Bohr effect — maternal blood becoming more
acidic and fetal blood more alkaline across the placenta — and the double Haldane
effect together enhance transfer.
The fetus also has a high haemoglobin concentration and a high cardiac output
relative to size, maximising delivery.
The fetus is protected on the steep, high-affinity part of its curve,
but this also means it has limited reserve, and maternal hypoxia or hypotension,
or reduced placental flow, rapidly compromises it.
So fetal haemoglobin's leftward-shifted high-affinity curve,
aided by the double Bohr and Haldane effects and a high haematocrit,
lets the fetus oxygenate itself from relatively hypoxic placental blood.
What changes occur during labour and the immediate postpartum period?
Labour and delivery impose acute physiological stress on top of the chronic
adaptations.
Each uterine contraction autotransfuses three to five hundred millilitres of blood
from the uteroplacental bed into the central circulation,
raising cardiac output stepwise; pain,
anxiety and the Valsalva of pushing add tachycardia,
hypertension and rises in oxygen consumption and minute ventilation,
with the carbon dioxide falling further.
Effective epidural analgesia blunts much of this sympathetic surge and is
beneficial in women with cardiac or hypertensive disease.
The greatest haemodynamic change comes immediately after delivery:
relief of aortocaval compression and the autotransfusion from the now-contracted
uterus increase cardiac output by up to seventy-five per cent in the first minutes,
before a gradual return towards baseline over days to weeks.
This postpartum surge is the period of highest risk for decompensation in heart
disease and for pulmonary oedema, especially if large volumes of fluid have been
given.
Blood loss at delivery, normally well tolerated because of the volume expansion,
can become major haemorrhage; uterine atony is the commonest cause and uterotonics
are the response.
So labour is a series of cardiac-output steps with each contraction,
the postpartum minutes bring a dramatic output surge,
and vigilance for haemorrhage and for cardiac decompensation is highest at delivery.
Finally, summarise how these changes shape your overall anaesthetic approach to the
parturient.
Drawing the threads together, the pregnant patient is a physiologically transformed
patient in whom the priorities of two lives must be balanced.
The respiratory changes — reduced reserve and rapid desaturation — and the swollen,
difficult airway make general anaesthesia hazardous,
so regional techniques are preferred whenever feasible,
sparing the airway and keeping the mother awake with protected reflexes.
The cardiovascular changes mean a circulation near its reserve,
intolerant of caval compression, requiring left tilt from twenty weeks and careful
management of the sympathectomy of neuraxial block with fluid and phenylephrine.
The gastrointestinal changes mandate aspiration prophylaxis and rapid sequence
induction if general anaesthesia is needed.
The prothrombotic state demands thromboprophylaxis.
Drug doses are reduced for both volatile and neuraxial agents,
with awareness guarded.
Throughout, uteroplacental flow is pressure-dependent and non-autoregulating,
so maintaining maternal pressure protects the fetus,
and most drugs cross the placenta so neonatal depression must be anticipated.
The postpartum surge and the risk of haemorrhage make delivery the moment of
greatest vigilance.
So every system change points the same way — towards regional anaesthesia,
meticulous positioning and pressure maintenance,
aspiration and thrombosis prophylaxis, reduced doses,
and the constant remembrance that maternal physiology is the fetus's only support.
Outline the physiology of pre-eclampsia and its anaesthetic implications.
Pre-eclampsia is a multisystem disorder of pregnancy,
defined by new hypertension after twenty weeks with end-organ involvement such as
proteinuria.
Its origin is the placenta: a failure of the normal trophoblastic remodelling of
the spiral arteries leaves a poorly perfused placenta that releases anti-angiogenic
factors into the maternal circulation, causing widespread endothelial dysfunction.
From that single mechanism the features follow:
vasoconstriction and loss of the normal refractoriness to vasopressors produce
hypertension; increased vascular permeability causes oedema,
including dangerous laryngeal oedema worsening an already difficult airway,
and pulmonary and cerebral oedema; glomerular injury causes proteinuria and
oliguria; hepatic involvement causes the HELLP syndrome with haemolysis,
raised liver enzymes and a low platelet count; and the patient is, despite oedema,
intravascularly depleted.
Anaesthetic implications are considerable. The airway is more oedematous and
difficult. Thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy may contraindicate neuraxial block,
so the platelet count and trend must be checked.
Neuraxial analgesia is otherwise beneficial, attenuating the hypertensive response,
but the contracted intravascular volume demands cautious fluid management to avoid
pulmonary oedema.
The hypertensive response to laryngoscopy is exaggerated and must be obtunded to
prevent intracranial haemorrhage, and magnesium is used for seizure prophylaxis,
itself potentiating muscle relaxants.
So pre-eclampsia is placental endothelial disease writ large across the mother,
and it complicates the airway, the choice and safety of neuraxial block,
fluid balance and the pressor response all at once.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Pregnancy produces widespread adaptations (hormone- and demand-driven),
most marked in late pregnancy, affecting nearly every system and altering the
mother's anaesthetic responses and risks — with two patients (mother + fetus) to
consider.
Second, Cardiovascular: ↑ blood volume, ↑ cardiac output (↑ HR + SV),
↓ systemic vascular resistance.
Aortocaval compression — the supine gravid uterus compresses the IVC and aorta → ↓
venous return, ↓ cardiac output, ↓ uterine/fetal blood flow (supine hypotension);
worsened by anaesthesia, prevented by left tilt / uterine displacement.
Third, Respiratory: ↑ O2 consumption,
↑ ventilation (compensated respiratory alkalosis),
↓ functional residual capacity (raised diaphragm) → rapid desaturation during
apnoea — essential pre-oxygenation, more pressing/dangerous intubation,
more difficult (swollen, vascular) airway.
Fourth, Aspiration risk ↑ (displaced stomach,
less competent lower oesophageal sphincter,
delayed gastric emptying — especially labour/opioids) → treat as full stomach:
antacid prophylaxis + RSI with cricoid pressure.
Drug handling altered: ↑ sensitivity (less volatile and local anaesthetic needed),
altered distribution, and placental transfer to the fetus.
Fifth, Placenta = organ of exchange (maternal + fetal circulations apposed across a
thin barrier).
Transfer by diffusion (gases) + carrier transport (glucose, amino acids);
drug diffusion follows usual rules — lipid-soluble, un-ionised, small,
unbound cross readily (most anaesthetic drugs reach the fetus;
ionised relaxants cross poorly).
Fetal circulation uses the placenta and bypasses the lungs via shunts;
at birth the lungs expand, pulmonary resistance falls, the placenta is lost,
and the shunts close — a transition disturbed by hypoxia.
Thank you. That concludes the station.